=pod

LuaJIT

=head1 Installation

=over

=item * LuaJIT

=over

=item * Download E<rchevron>

=item * Installation

=item * Running

=back

=item * Extensions

=over

=item * FFI Library

=over

=item * FFI Tutorial

=item * ffi.* API

=item * FFI Semantics

=back

=item * jit.* Library

=item * Lua/C API

=item * Profiler

=back

=item * Status

=over

=item * Changes

=back

=item * FAQ

=item * Performance E<rchevron>

=item * Wiki E<rchevron>

=item * Mailing List E<rchevron>

=back

LuaJIT is only distributed as a source package. This page explains how
to build and install LuaJIT with different operating systems and C
compilers.

For the impatient (on POSIX systems):

 make && sudo make install

LuaJIT currently builds out-of-the box on most systems. Here's the
compatibility matrix for the supported combinations of operating
systems, CPUs and compilers:

CPU / OS

Linux or

Android

*BSD, Other

OSX 10.4+ or

iOS 3.0+

Windows

XP/Vista/7

x86 (32 bit)

GCC 4.2+

GCC 4.2+

XCode 5.0+

Clang

MSVC, MSVC/EE

WinSDK

MinGW, Cygwin

x64 (64 bit)

GCC 4.2+

GCC 4.2+

ORBIS (PS4)

XCode 5.0+

Clang

MSVC + SDK v7.0

WinSDK v7.0

Durango (Xbox One)

ARMv5+

ARM9E+

GCC 4.2+

GCC 4.2+

PSP2 (PS VITA)

XCode 5.0+

Clang

ARM64

GCC 4.8+

XCode 6.0+

Clang 3.5+

PPC

GCC 4.3+

GCC 4.3+

GCC 4.1 (PS3)

XEDK (Xbox 360)

MIPS32

MIPS64

GCC 4.3+

GCC 4.3+

=head2 Configuring LuaJIT

The standard configuration should work fine for most installations.
Usually there is no need to tweak the settings. The following files
hold all user-configurable settings:

=over

=item * C<src/luaconf.h> sets some configuration variables.

=item * C<Makefile> has settings for B<installing> LuaJIT (POSIX only).

=item * C<src/Makefile> has settings for B<compiling> LuaJIT under
POSIX, MinGW or Cygwin.

=item * C<src/msvcbuild.bat> has settings for compiling LuaJIT with
MSVC or WinSDK.

=back

Please read the instructions given in these files, before changing any
settings.

=head2 POSIX Systems (Linux, OSX, *BSD etc.)

=head2 Prerequisites

Depending on your distribution, you may need to install a package for
GCC, the development headers and/or a complete SDK. E.g. on a current
Debian/Ubuntu, install C<libc6-dev> with the package manager.

Download the current source package of LuaJIT (pick the .tar.gz), if
you haven't already done so. Move it to a directory of your choice,
open a terminal window and change to this directory. Now unpack the
archive and change to the newly created directory:

 tar zxf LuaJIT-2.0.4.tar.gz
 cd LuaJIT-2.0.4

=head2 Building LuaJIT

The supplied Makefiles try to auto-detect the settings needed for your
operating system and your compiler. They need to be run with GNU Make,
which is probably the default on your system, anyway. Simply run:

 make

This always builds a native binary, depending on the host OS you're
running this command on. Check the section on cross-compilation for
more options.

By default, modules are only searched under the prefix C</usr/local>.
You can add an extra prefix to the search paths by appending the
C<PREFIX> option, e.g.:

 make PREFIX=/home/myself/lj2

Note for OSX: if the C<MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET> environment variable
is not set, then it's forced to C<10.4>.

=head2 Installing LuaJIT

The top-level Makefile installs LuaJIT by default under C</usr/local>,
i.e. the executable ends up in C</usr/local/bin> and so on. You need
root privileges to write to this path. So, assuming sudo is installed
on your system, run the following command and enter your sudo password:

 sudo make install

Otherwise specify the directory prefix as an absolute path, e.g.:

 make install PREFIX=/home/myself/lj2

Obviously the prefixes given during build and installation need to be
the same.

=head2 Windows Systems

=head2 Prerequisites

Either install one of the open source SDKs (E<rchevron> MinGW or
E<rchevron> Cygwin), which come with a modified GCC plus the required
development headers.

Or install Microsoft's Visual C++ (MSVC). The freely downloadable
E<rchevron> Express Edition works just fine, but only contains an x86
compiler.

The freely downloadable E<rchevron> Windows SDK only comes with command
line tools, but this is all you need to build LuaJIT. It contains x86
and x64 compilers.

Next, download the source package and unpack it using an archive
manager (e.g. the Windows Explorer) to a directory of your choice.

=head2 Building with MSVC

Open a "Visual Studio .NET Command Prompt", C<cd> to the directory
where you've unpacked the sources and run these commands:

 cd src
 msvcbuild

Then follow the installation instructions below.

=head2 Building with the Windows SDK

Open a "Windows SDK Command Shell" and select the x86 compiler:

 setenv /release /x86

Or select the x64 compiler:

 setenv /release /x64

Then C<cd> to the directory where you've unpacked the sources and run
these commands:

 cd src
 msvcbuild

Then follow the installation instructions below.

=head2 Building with MinGW or Cygwin

Open a command prompt window and make sure the MinGW or Cygwin programs
are in your path. Then C<cd> to the directory where you've unpacked the
sources and run this command for MinGW:

 mingw32-make

Or this command for Cygwin:

 make

Then follow the installation instructions below.

=head2 Installing LuaJIT

Copy C<luajit.exe> and C<lua51.dll> (built in the C<src> directory) to
a newly created directory (any location is ok). Add C<lua> and
C<lua\jit> directories below it and copy all Lua files from the
C<src\jit> directory of the distribution to the latter directory.

There are no hardcoded absolute path names E<mdash> all modules are
loaded relative to the directory where C<luajit.exe> is installed (see
C<src/luaconf.h>).

=head2 Cross-compiling LuaJIT

First, let's clear up some terminology:

=over

=item * Host: This is your development system, usually based on a x64
or x86 CPU.

=item * Target: This is the target system you want LuaJIT to run on,
e.g. Android/ARM.

=item * Toolchain: This comprises a C compiler, linker, assembler and a
matching C library.

=item * Host (or system) toolchain: This is the toolchain used to build
native binaries for your host system.

=item * Cross-compile toolchain: This is the toolchain used to build
binaries for the target system. They can only be run on the target
system.

=back

The GNU Makefile-based build system allows cross-compiling on any host
for any supported target:

=over

=item * Yes, you need a toolchain for both your host I<and> your
target!

=item * Both host and target architectures must have the same pointer
size.

=item * E.g. if you want to cross-compile to a 32 bit target on a 64
bit host, you need to install the multilib development package (e.g.
C<libc6-dev-i386> on Debian/Ubuntu) and build a 32 bit host part
(C<HOST_CC="gcc -m32">).

=item * 64 bit targets always require compilation on a 64 bit host.

=back

You need to specify C<TARGET_SYS> whenever the host OS and the target
OS differ, or you'll get assembler or linker errors:

=over

=item * E.g. if you're compiling on a Windows or OSX host for embedded
Linux or Android, you need to add C<TARGET_SYS=Linux> to the examples
below.

=item * For a minimal target OS, you may need to disable the built-in
allocator in C<src/Makefile> and use C<TARGET_SYS=Other>.

=item * Don't forget to specify the same C<TARGET_SYS> for the install
step, too.

=back

Here are some examples where host and target have the same CPU:

 # Cross-compile to a 32 bit binary on a multilib x64 OS
 make CC="gcc -m32"
 
 # Cross-compile on Debian/Ubuntu for Windows (mingw32 package)
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=i586-mingw32msvc- TARGET_SYS=Windows

The C<CROSS> prefix allows specifying a standard GNU cross-compile
toolchain (Binutils, GCC and a matching libc). The prefix may vary
depending on the C<--target> the toolchain was built for (note the
C<CROSS> prefix has a trailing C<"-">). The examples below use the
canonical toolchain triplets for Linux.

Since there's often no easy way to detect CPU features at runtime, it's
important to compile with the proper CPU or architecture settings:

=over

=item * The best way to get consistent results is to specify the
correct settings when building the toolchain yourself.

=item * For a pre-built, generic toolchain add C<-mcpu=...> or
C<-march=...> and other necessary flags to C<TARGET_CFLAGS>.

=item * For ARM it's important to have the correct C<-mfloat-abi=...>
setting, too. Otherwise LuaJIT may not run at the full performance of
your target CPU.

=item * For MIPS it's important to select a supported ABI (o32 on
MIPS32, n64 on MIPS64) and consistently compile your project either
with hard-float or soft-float compiler settings.

=back

Here are some examples for targets with a different CPU than the host:

 # ARM soft-float
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=arm-linux-gnueabi- \
      TARGET_CFLAGS="-mfloat-abi=soft"
 
 # ARM soft-float ABI with VFP (example for Cortex-A9)
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=arm-linux-gnueabi- \
      TARGET_CFLAGS="-mcpu=cortex-a9 -mfloat-abi=softfp"
 
 # ARM hard-float ABI with VFP (armhf, most modern toolchains)
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=arm-linux-gnueabihf-
 
 # ARM64
 make CROSS=aarch64-linux-
 
 # PPC
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=powerpc-linux-gnu-
 
 # MIPS32 big-endian
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=mips-linux-
 # MIPS32 little-endian
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=mipsel-linux-
 
 # MIPS64 big-endian
 make CROSS=mips-linux- TARGET_CFLAGS="-mips64r2 -mabi=64"
 # MIPS64 little-endian
 make CROSS=mipsel-linux- TARGET_CFLAGS="-mips64r2 -mabi=64"

You can cross-compile for B<Android> using the Android NDK. The
environment variables need to match the install locations and the
desired target platform. E.g. Android 4.0 corresponds to ABI level 14.
For details check the folder C<docs> in the NDK directory.

Only a few common variations for the different CPUs, ABIs and platforms
are listed. Please use your own judgement for which combination you
want to build/deploy or which lowest common denominator you want to
pick:

 # Android/ARM, armeabi (ARMv5TE soft-float), Android 2.2+ (Froyo)
 NDK=/opt/android/ndk
 NDKABI=8
 NDKVER=$NDK/toolchains/arm-linux-androideabi-4.9
 NDKP=$NDKVER/prebuilt/linux-x86/bin/arm-linux-androideabi-
 NDKF="--sysroot $NDK/platforms/android-$NDKABI/arch-arm"
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=$NDKP TARGET_FLAGS="$NDKF"
 
 # Android/ARM, armeabi-v7a (ARMv7 VFP), Android 4.0+ (ICS)
 NDK=/opt/android/ndk
 NDKABI=14
 NDKVER=$NDK/toolchains/arm-linux-androideabi-4.9
 NDKP=$NDKVER/prebuilt/linux-x86/bin/arm-linux-androideabi-
 NDKF="--sysroot $NDK/platforms/android-$NDKABI/arch-arm"
 NDKARCH="-march=armv7-a -mfloat-abi=softfp -Wl,--fix-cortex-a8"
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=$NDKP TARGET_FLAGS="$NDKF $NDKARCH"
 
 # Android/MIPS, mipsel (MIPS32R1 hard-float), Android 4.0+ (ICS)
 NDK=/opt/android/ndk
 NDKABI=14
 NDKVER=$NDK/toolchains/mipsel-linux-android-4.9
 NDKP=$NDKVER/prebuilt/linux-x86/bin/mipsel-linux-android-
 NDKF="--sysroot $NDK/platforms/android-$NDKABI/arch-mips"
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=$NDKP TARGET_FLAGS="$NDKF"
 
 # Android/x86, x86 (i686 SSE3), Android 4.0+ (ICS)
 NDK=/opt/android/ndk
 NDKABI=14
 NDKVER=$NDK/toolchains/x86-4.9
 NDKP=$NDKVER/prebuilt/linux-x86/bin/i686-linux-android-
 NDKF="--sysroot $NDK/platforms/android-$NDKABI/arch-x86"
 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=$NDKP TARGET_FLAGS="$NDKF"

You can cross-compile for B<iOS 3.0+> (iPhone/iPad) using the
E<rchevron> iOS SDK:

Note: B<the JIT compiler is disabled for iOS>, because regular iOS Apps
are not allowed to generate code at runtime. You'll only get the
performance of the LuaJIT interpreter on iOS. This is still faster than
plain Lua, but much slower than the JIT compiler. Please complain to
Apple, not me. Or use Android. :-p

 # iOS/ARM (32 bit)
 ISDKP=$(xcrun --sdk iphoneos --show-sdk-path)
 ICC=$(xcrun --sdk iphoneos --find clang)
 ISDKF="-arch armv7 -isysroot $ISDKP"
 make HOST_CC="clang -m32 -arch i386" CROSS="$(dirname $ICC)/" \
      TARGET_FLAGS="$ISDKF" TARGET_SYS=iOS
 
 # iOS/ARM64
 ISDKP=$(xcrun --sdk iphoneos --show-sdk-path)
 ICC=$(xcrun --sdk iphoneos --find clang)
 ISDKF="-arch arm64 -isysroot $ISDKP"
 make CROSS="$(dirname $ICC)/" TARGET_FLAGS="$ISDKF" TARGET_SYS=iOS

=head2 Cross-compiling for consoles

Building LuaJIT for consoles requires both a supported host compiler
(x86 or x64) and a cross-compiler (to PPC or ARM) from the official
console SDK.

Due to restrictions on consoles, the JIT compiler is disabled and only
the fast interpreter is built. This is still faster than plain Lua, but
much slower than the JIT compiler. The FFI is disabled, too, since it's
not very useful in such an environment.

The following commands build a static library C<libluajit.a>, which can
be linked against your game, just like the Lua library.

To cross-compile for B<PS3> from a Linux host (requires 32 bit GCC,
i.e. multilib Linux/x64) or a Windows host (requires 32 bit MinGW), run
this command:

 make HOST_CC="gcc -m32" CROSS=ppu-lv2-

To cross-compile for B<PS4> from a Windows host, open a "Visual Studio
.NET Command Prompt" (64 bit host compiler), C<cd> to the directory
where you've unpacked the sources and run the following commands:

 cd src
 ps4build

To cross-compile for B<PS Vita> from a Windows host, open a "Visual
Studio .NET Command Prompt" (32 bit host compiler), C<cd> to the
directory where you've unpacked the sources and run the following
commands:

 cd src
 psvitabuild

To cross-compile for B<Xbox 360> from a Windows host, open a "Visual
Studio .NET Command Prompt" (32 bit host compiler), C<cd> to the
directory where you've unpacked the sources and run the following
commands:

 cd src
 xedkbuild

To cross-compile for B<Xbox One> from a Windows host, open a "Visual
Studio .NET Command Prompt" (64 bit host compiler), C<cd> to the
directory where you've unpacked the sources and run the following
commands:

 cd src
 xb1build

=head2 Embedding LuaJIT

LuaJIT is API-compatible with Lua 5.1. If you've already embedded Lua
into your application, you probably don't need to do anything to switch
to LuaJIT, except link with a different library:

=over

=item * It's strongly suggested to build LuaJIT separately using the
supplied build system. Please do I<not> attempt to integrate the
individual source files into your build tree. You'll most likely get
the internal build dependencies wrong or mess up the compiler flags.
Treat LuaJIT like any other external library and link your application
with either the dynamic or static library, depending on your needs.

=item * If you want to load C modules compiled for plain Lua with
C<require()>, you need to make sure the public symbols (e.g.
C<lua_pushnumber>) are exported, too:

=over

=item * On POSIX systems you can either link to the shared library or
link the static library into your application. In the latter case
you'll need to export all public symbols from your main executable
(e.g. C<-Wl,-E> on Linux) and add the external dependencies (e.g. C<-lm
-ldl> on Linux).

=item * Since Windows symbols are bound to a specific DLL name, you
need to link to the C<lua51.dll> created by the LuaJIT build (do not
rename the DLL). You may link LuaJIT statically on Windows only if you
don't intend to load Lua/C modules at runtime.

=back

=item * If you're building a 64 bit application on OSX which links
directly or indirectly against LuaJIT, you need to link your main
executable with these flags:

 -pagezero_size 10000 -image_base 100000000

Also, it's recommended to C<rebase> all (self-compiled) shared
libraries which are loaded at runtime on OSX/x64 (e.g. C extension
modules for Lua). See: C<man rebase>

=back

Additional hints for initializing LuaJIT using the C API functions:

=over

=item * Here's a E<rchevron> simple example for embedding Lua or LuaJIT
into your application.

=item * Make sure you use C<luaL_newstate>. Avoid using
C<lua_newstate>, since this uses the (slower) default memory allocator
from your system (no support for this on x64).

=item * Make sure you use C<luaL_openlibs> and not the old Lua 5.0
style of calling C<luaopen_base> etc. directly.

=item * To change or extend the list of standard libraries to load,
copy C<src/lib_init.c> to your project and modify it accordingly. Make
sure the C<jit> library is loaded or the JIT compiler will not be
activated.

=item * The C<bit.*> module for bitwise operations is already built-in.
There's no need to statically link E<rchevron> Lua BitOp to your
application.

=back

=head2 Hints for Distribution Maintainers

The LuaJIT build system has extra provisions for the needs of most
POSIX-based distributions. If you're a package maintainer for a
distribution, I<please> make use of these features and avoid patching,
subverting, autotoolizing or messing up the build system in unspeakable
ways.

There should be absolutely no need to patch C<luaconf.h> or any of the
Makefiles. And please do not hand-pick files for your packages E<mdash>
simply use whatever C<make install> creates. There's a reason for all
of the files I<and> directories it creates.

The build system uses GNU make and auto-detects most settings based on
the host you're building it on. This should work fine for native
builds, even when sandboxed. You may need to pass some of the following
flags to I<both> the C<make> and the C<make install> command lines for
a regular distribution build:

=over

=item * C<PREFIX> overrides the installation path and should usually be
set to C</usr>. Setting this also changes the module paths and the
paths needed to locate the shared library.

=item * C<DESTDIR> is an absolute path which allows you to install to a
shadow tree instead of the root tree of the build system.

=item * C<MULTILIB> sets the architecture-specific library path
component for multilib systems. The default is C<lib>.

=item * Have a look at the top-level C<Makefile> and C<src/Makefile>
for additional variables to tweak. The following variables I<may> be
overridden, but it's I<not> recommended, except for special needs like
cross-builds: C<BUILDMODE, CC, HOST_CC, STATIC_CC, DYNAMIC_CC, CFLAGS,
HOST_CFLAGS, TARGET_CFLAGS, LDFLAGS, HOST_LDFLAGS, TARGET_LDFLAGS,
TARGET_SHLDFLAGS, TARGET_FLAGS, LIBS, HOST_LIBS, TARGET_LIBS, CROSS,
HOST_SYS, TARGET_SYS>

=back

The build system has a special target for an amalgamated build, i.e.
C<make amalg>. This compiles the LuaJIT core as one huge C file and
allows GCC to generate faster and shorter code. Alas, this requires
lots of memory during the build. This may be a problem for some users,
that's why it's not enabled by default. But it shouldn't be a problem
for most build farms. It's recommended that binary distributions use
this target for their LuaJIT builds.

The tl;dr version of the above:

 make amalg PREFIX=/usr && \
 make install PREFIX=/usr DESTDIR=/tmp/buildroot

Finally, if you encounter any difficulties, please contact me first,
instead of releasing a broken package onto unsuspecting users. Because
they'll usually gonna complain to me (the upstream) and not you (the
package maintainer), anyway.

----

Copyright E<copy> 2005-2016 Mike Pall E<middot> Contact

=cut

#Pod::HTML2Pod conversion notes:
#From file install.html
# 25008 bytes of input
#Wed Jun 29 13:18:15 2016 agentzh
# No a_name switch not specified, so will not try to render <a name='...'>
# No a_href switch not specified, so will not try to render <a href='...'>
# Deleting phrasal "a" element (`a_34) because it has super-phrasal elements (`br_16) as children.
# Deleting phrasal "a" element (`a_28) because it has super-phrasal elements (`br_11) as children.
# Deleting phrasal "a" element (`a_25) because it has super-phrasal elements (`br_3) as children.
