=pod

LuaJIT

=head1 LuaJIT

=over

=item * LuaJIT

=over

=item * Download E<rchevron>

=item * Installation

=item * Running

=back

=item * Extensions

=over

=item * FFI Library

=over

=item * FFI Tutorial

=item * ffi.* API

=item * FFI Semantics

=back

=item * jit.* Library

=item * Lua/C API

=item * Profiler

=back

=item * Status

=over

=item * Changes

=back

=item * FAQ

=item * Performance E<rchevron>

=item * Wiki E<rchevron>

=item * Mailing List E<rchevron>

=back

LuaJIT is a B<Just-In-Time Compiler> (JIT) for the E<rchevron> Lua
programming language. Lua is a powerful, dynamic and light-weight
programming language. It may be embedded or used as a general-purpose,
stand-alone language.

LuaJIT is Copyright E<copy> 2005-2017 Mike Pall, released under the
E<rchevron> MIT open source license.

=head2 Compatibility

Windows

Linux

BSD

OSX

POSIX

Embedded

Android

iOS

PS3

PS4

PS Vita

Xbox 360

Xbox One

GCC

Clang

LLVM

MSVC

x86

x64

ARM

ARM64

PPC

MIPS32

MIPS64

Lua 5.1

API+ABI

+ JIT

+ BitOp

+ FFI

Drop-in

DLL/.so

=head2 Overview

3x

- 100x

115 KB

VM

90 KB

JIT

63 KLOC

C

24 KLOC

ASM

11 KLOC

Lua

LuaJIT has been successfully used as a B<scripting middleware> in
games, appliances, network and graphics apps, numerical simulations,
trading platforms and many other specialty applications. It scales from
embedded devices, smartphones, desktops up to server farms. It combines
high flexibility with E<rchevron> high performance and an unmatched
B<low memory footprint>.

LuaJIT has been in continuous development since 2005. It's widely
considered to be B<one of the fastest dynamic language
implementations>. It has outperformed other dynamic languages on many
cross-language benchmarks since its first release E<mdash> often by a
substantial margin.

For B<LuaJIT 2.0>, the whole VM has been rewritten from the ground up
and relentlessly optimized for performance. It combines a B<high-speed
interpreter>, written in assembler, with a B<state-of-the-art JIT
compiler>.

An innovative B<trace compiler> is integrated with advanced, SSA-based
optimizations and highly tuned code generation backends. A substantial
reduction of the overhead associated with dynamic languages allows it
to break into the performance range traditionally reserved for offline,
static language compilers.

=head2 More ...

Please select a sub-topic in the navigation bar to learn more about
LuaJIT.

----

Copyright E<copy> 2005-2017 Mike Pall E<middot> Contact

=cut

#Pod::HTML2Pod conversion notes:
#From file luajit.html
# 8082 bytes of input
#Mon May 14 13:19:16 2018 agentzh
# No a_name switch not specified, so will not try to render <a name='...'>
# No a_href switch not specified, so will not try to render <a href='...'>
